In this section, we'll be focusing on three metrics related to Goals and Goal Funnels.
We'll revisit Goal Conversion Rate sometimes just referred to as Conversion Rate.
We'll also explore Funnel Conversion Rate and Abandonment Rate.
If you're in the Google Merchandise Store account,
in the Master View,
you can navigate to the Funnel Visualization report.
If you select Goal one,
you'll see a Funnel Visualization that looks like this.
At the bottom of the Funnel Visualization,
we see Funnel Conversion Rate as its own metric.
Funnel Conversion Rate refers to the number of sessions in which
the funnel was entered and the goal destination page reached.
Funnel Conversion Rate is, by definition,
pretty much always higher than
Goal Conversion Rate because we're dealing with a smaller number of sessions.
Funnel Conversion Rate is calculated based only
on the sessions in which the user entered the funnel.
Whereas, if we go to
the Goal Overview report and we select a single Goal, the Conversion Rate,
as we've seen before in previous discussions,
is calculated based on goal completions relative to all sessions.
We also see Abandonment Rate.
Abandonment Rate is calculated only for
those goals for which a Goal Funnel has been configured.
Going back to Goal Conversion Rate,
it may not be intuitive that the Goal Funnel does not affect the Goal Conversion Rate.
Let's look at an illustration.
Let's say we have one goal that has a funnel starting on the News page,
then going to the Newsletter Sign-up page and then going to
the Goal URL which corresponds to the Newsletter Sign-up Confirmation page.
Let's say that we have another goal that starts on the About Us page,
goes to the Newsletter Sign-up page as well and then ends up on the same Goal URL.
We therefore have two goals,
both pointing to the same Goal URL but with different funnels.
In this case, Goals one and two would have
a different Funnel Conversion Rate and
a different Abandonment Rate but the Conversion Rate would be the same.
The funnel does not affect Conversion Rate.
Let's consider a little bit of a riddle.
Why isn't Abandonment Rate always the exact inverse of Funnel Conversion Rate?
We're seeing here an Abandonment Rate of 71.48 percent.
If we go to Funnel Visualization,
we see a Funnel Conversion Rate of 28.44 percent.
That almost adds up to a 100 percent between
Funnel Conversion Rate and Abandonment Rate but not exactly.
Why don't they always equal 100 percent together?
Now, this discussion is going to get a little bit
detailed but it will help us really understand how these two metrics are calculated.
The first thing that we'll want to be aware of
is if the first step of the Funnel is marked
as required in the Funnel configuration that you or someone else set up in the Goal.
Let's go to the Goal Configuration from
the admin screen of the Master View in the Google Merchandise Store account,
Purchase Completed is our Goal.
We see here that the funnel was defined with the first step required.
That means that this Funnel Configuration will only
recognize users who entered the funnel at the first step.
If there's a chance that users will enter the funnel at a lower step,
this funnel will not recognize those sessions.
This is why the Funnel Visualization that we see for
the Purchase Completed goal in the Merchandise Store Master View,
only shows entries at the first step of the funnel.
So, that's one variable.
You can configure funnels to require the first step or not.
It depends on the type of funnel that you want to build.
You could define two Goals with the same Funnel Configuration,
the only difference being that the first step is required in one and not in the other.
But let's get back to the calculation of Funnel Conversion Rate and Abandonment Rate.
The reason that they don't always add up to
100 percent is that the Funnel Conversion Rate, as expected,
does recognize the first step required setting when it's specified,
whereas Abandonment Rate disregards that setting.
So, they're not always calculated based on the same factors.
This means that if you do have a Goal Funnel set up where the first step is not required,
the Funnel Conversion Rate and the Abandonment Rate will always equal 100 percent.
Because in this case,
both metrics are calculated based on entries at all steps in the funnel.
However, if you instead configured a funnel to require the first step,
that's where the discrepancy can happen
because Abandonment Rate will still be calculated based on
all entries in the funnel whereas
Funnel Conversion Rate will only be
calculated based on entries in the top step of the funnel.
So, you may end up with a situation where Funnel Conversion Rate plus
Abandonment Rate equal more than 100 percent or less than 100 percent.
In fact, if we look at the Funnel Conversion Rate for the funnel in the Master View,
we see that it's 28.44 percent.
If we go to the Goal Overview report,
we see that the Abandonment Rate for Goal one is 71.48 percent.
So, close to a 100 percent but not exactly.
This is because the first step of this funnel is required,
the Funnel Conversion Rate is recognizing entries only in the first step of the funnel,
whereas the Abandonment Rate is still
recognizing the few entries that happened at a lower step in the funnel.
As one more aspect of Goal Funnels in GA that is probably quite unexpected for all of us,
there is the phenomenon of backfilling.
Backfilling means that a higher funnel step in a funnel
always reports at least as many completions as a lower step,
even if all of those funnel step completions did not occur.
So, when we're reviewing the Funnel Visualization report,
it's a good idea to also validate the flow with the Goal Flow report and even to validate
Unique Pageview in the Pages report because
the funnel steps correspond to Unique Page-views of that step in the session.
Let's review backfill in greater detail.
What backfill means is that a step that's higher in the funnel
will never report lower completions than a step that's lower in the funnel.
So, for instance, even if there was
an Express Payment option and users were
able to skip over Payment and go right to Review,
Payment would still show a higher number of completions than Review.
How can we validate the actual flow through the funnel?
When we're viewing the Funnel Visualization report,
it's always recommended to also refer to the Goal Flow report.
The Goal Flow report gives
a more detailed illustration of progression through steps in the funnel.
In this case, we can see, in fact,
that the three middle steps in the funnel are in fact being skipped in many cases and
that backfill is being shown in the Funnel Visualization report.
Another way that we could validate completions of funnel steps is to just look in
the Pages report for the Unique Pageviews that correspond to the funnel steps.
So, for instance, we could see here that
payment.html is the page that corresponds to the payment step in the funnel.
If we go to the All Pages report and filter for the Payment page,
we could see that there were 1689 Unique Page-views of this page.
So, even the Goal Flow report was somewhat
inflated and the Funnel Visualization report was very inflated.
Now, don't be discouraged about funnels.
Goal funnels are still very useful.
But we do need to remember to refer to both the Funnel Visualization
and the Goal Flow reports to verify if backfill is occurring.
It's also not a bad idea to further validate
the funnel by checking the Unique Pageviews for all steps involved.
As one more consideration about funnels and funnel metrics you may be wondering why
the Merchandise Store Demo account has a Purchase goal and a funnel
configured when Enhanced Ecommerce is already being captured.
This is a good practice because the Goal Funnel allows us to populate Abandonment Rate,
Funnel Conversion Rate and the Funnel Visualization and Goal Flow report themselves,
thereby providing additional perspectives as we analyze our users path to conversion.